---
layout: post
title: Map
image: ../images/map.png
---

<h1>Ruby!</h1>
<h2>Enumerables and Enumerators</h2>
<h3>Part 1: #map and #select</h3>
<h4>Give it to me short and sweet.</h4>
<p>Basically, #map takes any collection, and cycles through it, applying whatever block of code you've specified to that collection, and <strong>returning an array</strong>.<p>
	<h4>Tell me more, tell me more!</h4>
		<p>Very simply put, an enumerable is a type of class in ruby that represents a collection of things. Enumerables and enumerators (their methods, or verbs) are all about iteration. Enumerables can be iterated over, and enumerators iterate over them.</p>
	<h4>Howabout some practical application?</h4>
		<p>One of the important things to remember at the outset with #map is that it returns an array. So, any time you need to return an array, an enumerator like #map (or #select) is a great way to go.<p>
		<p>Picture this: You're solving a problem, and the clearest way to do it seems to be to use the #each operator, but you really need a place to put the results that #each produces, so you create a new array before iterating, and shovel the results of each #each cycle into that array, and then return that array when you're done.</p>
		<p><pre><code>new_array = []
	array.each do |x|
		array << (x * 3)
	end</code></pre></p>
		<p>Guess what?</p>
		<p>You basically just implimented #map.</p>
		<p><pre><code>array.map {|x| x * 3}</code></pre></p>
	<h4>Nifty! What is this #select you speak of?</h4>
		<p>#select is like map, in that returns an array (read: super useful). #select is particularly useful because it will siphon off elements of the array it is called on, based on whether the block it's fed returns <span class = "true">true</span> or <span class = "false">false</span>.</p>
		<p>Picture this: you want to iterate through an array, and return an array... but you need to be picky with your returns. You need to return a select group of member from your input array.</p>
		<p>So, you create a new empty array, and then write an each/do that only shovels members of the input array into the new array that meet certain criteria. Then you return the new array.</p>
		<p><pre><code>new_array = []
array.each do |x|
	new_array << x if x %3 == 0
end</code></pre></p>
		<p>Guess what! That's the long version of #select! Exciting!</p>
		<p><pre><code>array.select {|x| x % 3 == 0}</code></pre></p>
	<h4>The More You Know...</h4>
	<p>Enumerators can help make your code dry, but they also end up being super powerful. One of these days, I'd like to write more on chaining enumerators. Stay tuned!</p>

